book: Add "Actions & Menus" chapter (#577)
gtk-rs/gtk4-rs: book/src/actions.md

# Actions

By now, we have already learned many ways to glue our widgets together.
We can send messages through channels, emit signals, share reference-counted state and bind properties.
Now, we will complete our set by learning about actions.

An action is a piece of functionality bound to a certain GObject.
Let us check out the most simple case where we activate an action without a parameter.

<span class="filename">Filename: listings/actions/1/main.rs</span>

```rust,no_run
{{#rustdoc_include ../listings/actions/1/main.rs:build_ui}}
```

First, we created a new [`gio::SimpleAction`](https://gtk-rs.org/gtk-rs-core/stable/latest/docs/gio/struct.SimpleAction.html) which is named "quit" and takes no parameter.
We also connected a callback which closes the window.

<span class="filename">Filename: listings/actions/1/main.rs</span>

```rust,no_run
{{#rustdoc_include ../listings/actions/1/main.rs:main}}
```

One of the most popular reasons to use actions are keyboard accelerators, so we added one here.

> With [`set_accels_for_action`](../docs/gtk4/prelude/trait.GtkApplicationExt.html#tymethod.set_accels_for_action) one can assign one or more accelerators to a certain action.

Author: When linking to gtk4-rs, local links have the advantage that the git book links to the git docs and the stable book links to the stable docs.
Because of the order "stable" and package-name appears in the URL that unfortunately does not work for gtk-rs-core

Check the documentation of [`accelerator_parse`](../docs/gtk4/functions/fn.accelerator_parse.html) in order to learn more about its syntax.

> Here we assigned `<primary>Q` which translates to `Ctrl+Q` on Linux and Windows and `Command+Q` on macOS.

Author: I checked before with App Icon Preview and there Ctrl+Q only closes the focused window.
Which apps show a different behaviour?

> Here we assigned `<primary>Q` which translates to `Ctrl+Q` on Linux and Windows and `Command+Q` on macOS.

Reviewer: Here it is in the HIG: https://gitlab.gnome.org/Teams/Design/hig-www/-/blob/c44a72420c13c18a510541f27b396e79fc78e0c7/source/reference/keyboard.rst#L19-21

Not on the actual site yet for some reason.

> Here we assigned `<primary>Q` which translates to `Ctrl+Q` on Linux and Windows and `Command+Q` on macOS.

Author: Ah then the easy solution is to switch to ctrl + w

Before we move on to other aspects of actions, let us appreciate a few things that are curious here.
The "win" part of "win.quit" is the group of the action.
But how does GTK know that "win" is the action group of our window?
The answer is that it is so common to add actions to windows and applications that there are already two predefined groups available:
- "app" for actions global to the application and
- "win" for actions tied to an application window.

If that would not be the case, we would have to add the action group via [`gio::SimpleActionGroup`](https://gtk-rs.org/gtk-rs-core/stable/latest/docs/gio/struct.SimpleActionGroup.html).

<span class="filename">Filename: listings/actions/2/main.rs</span>

```rust ,no_run,noplayground
{{#rustdoc_include ../listings/actions/2/main.rs:action_group}}
```

Also, if we had multiple instances of the same windows we would expect that only the currently focused window will be closed when activating "win.quit".
And that is what happens, but that also means that we actually define one action per window instance.

> If we want to have a single globally accessible action instead, we add it to our application.

Author: Should I spell it out that I mean `add_action`?

> If we want to have a single globally accessible action instead, we add it to our application.

Reviewer: Yeah, that should work.

- string parameter and string state.

Let us modify our small app to demonstrate these cases.
First we extend `add_actions`.
For the action without parameter or state, we choose "win.quit" which we are already familiar with.

<span class="filename">Filename: listings/actions/6/window/mod.rs</span>

```rust ,no_run,noplayground
{{#rustdoc_include ../listings/actions/6/window/mod.rs:action_quit}}
```
With the action "sensitive-button", we manipulate the "sensitive" property of `button`.
We take care that we follow established conventions.
Actions with no parameter and boolean state should behave like toggle actions.
That means, that the caller can expect that after they activated the action, the boolean state will toggle.

<span class="filename">Filename: listings/actions/6/window/mod.rs</span>

```rust ,no_run,noplayground
{{#rustdoc_include ../listings/actions/6/window/mod.rs:action_sensitive_button}}
```

Finally, we add "win.orientation", an action with string parameter and string state.
This action can be used to change the orientation of `gtk_box`.
Here the convention suggests that the state of stateful actions with a parameter, should follow the given parameter.

> The logic of the code does not rely on a state but with it, the menu will be able to display the current state.

Author: The point is that we actually don't need a stateful action, because we just set the orientation to the parameter.
The only benefit is that then the menu knows what the current state is and can display it.
Do you have an idea how to make this point clearer or should I just drop it?

> The logic of the code does not rely on a state but with it, the menu will be able to display the current state.

Reviewer: Something like "We don't need the action state to implement orientation switching, however it is useful for making the menu display the current orientation."?

```

While it is not the [only option](https://gtk-rs.org/gtk-rs-core/stable/latest/docs/gio/struct.Menu.html), the most convenient way to create menus is via the interface builder.
We do that by adding the menu in front of the template.

<span class="filename">Filename: listings/actions/6/window/window.ui</span>

```xml
{{#rustdoc_include ../listings/actions/6/window/window.ui}}
```

Note how we specified a target:

```xml
<attribute name="target">Horizontal</attribute>
```

String is the default type of the target which is why we did not have to specify a type.
With targets of other types the correct [GVariant format string](https://docs.gtk.org/glib/gvariant-format-strings.html) has to be specified.
For example, a `i32` variable with value "5" would correspond to this:

```xml
<attribute name="target" type="i">5</attribute>
```

This is how the app then looks in action:

<div style="text-align:center"><img src="img/actions_menu.gif" /></div>

## Settings

The menu entries nicely display the state of stateful actions, but after the app is closed everything is gone.
As so often, we use `gio::Settings` to solve this.

> First we add the settings to `imp::Window` and manually implement the `Default` trait.

Author: > Maybe it's better to create settings when needed 

You mean in `constructed`?

> First we add the settings to `imp::Window` and manually implement the `Default` trait.

Reviewer: That could work.

> First we add the settings to `imp::Window` and manually implement the `Default` trait.

Author: It made the rest of the code a bit more annoying to work with so I left it as is.

We create actions with `create_actions` and then add them to the action group of our window.

<span class="filename">Filename: listings/actions/7/window/mod.rs</span>

```rust ,no_run,noplayground
{{#rustdoc_include ../listings/actions/7/window/mod.rs:settings_create_actions}}
```

Since actions from `create_actions` follow conventions as well we can keep further changes to a minimum.
The action "win.sensitive-button" toggles its state with each activation and the state of action "win.orientation" follows the given parameter.

We still have to specify what should happen when the actions are activated though.
For the stateful actions, instead of adding callbacks to their "activate" signals we bind the settings to properties we want to manipulate.

<span class="filename">Filename: listings/actions/7/window/mod.rs</span>

```rust ,no_run,noplayground
{{#rustdoc_include ../listings/actions/7/window/mod.rs:bind_settings}}
```

Finally, we make sure that `bind_settings` is called within `constructed`.

<span class="filename">Filename: listings/actions/7/window/imp.rs</span>

```rust ,no_run,noplayground
{{#rustdoc_include ../listings/actions/7/window/imp.rs:object_impl}}
```

> Actions are extremely powerful and we only touched the surface here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Actions are extremely powerful and we're only scratching the surface here.
```

> If you want to learn about them, the [GNOME developer documentation](https://developer.gnome.org/documentation/tutorials/actions.html) is a good place to start.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to learn more about them, the [GNOME developer documentation](https://developer.gnome.org/documentation/tutorials/actions.html) is a good place to start.
```
